Initial draft of CI/CD recommendations (#22)
vshn/kb: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/cicd_concept.adoc

= Continuous Delivery

In order to ensure that code released to production is of the highest possible quality, we recommend
setting up three separate deployment environments to play different roles in the Continuous Integration 
/ Continuous Delivery process.

== Target Enviroments

A typical CI/CD framework would deploy images to the following three environments:

=== Development

The development environment is used for internal testing of infrastructure, such as endpoints,

> pipelines, back-end authentication, load tests, and database configuration.

Reviewer: Can we add a sentence that forbids any external parties relying on DEV? I.e. at BAR we now have the problem that external parties use DEV and we can't properly use it anymore to test changes because they might break stuff...

Author: Good point, I have just added a sentence about it.

= Continuous Delivery

In order to ensure that code released to production is of the highest possible quality, we recommend
setting up three separate deployment environments to play different roles in the Continuous Integration 
/ Continuous Delivery process.

== Target Enviroments

A typical CI/CD framework would deploy images to the following three environments:

=== Development

The development environment is used for internal testing of infrastructure, such as endpoints,
pipelines, back-end authentication, load tests, and database configuration. In order to be free
to change or take down the development environment at will, we recommend against giving 

> external organizations any access to it.

Reviewer 2: Is this really imperative? Are "external organizations" meant to be parties that are involved in the development process (e.g. QA, designers, etc.)?

We should maybe mention the use of "review apps" in the development environment, which makes "taking down" an action that is decoupled from an "environment" (as it is built afresh and taken down for every MR independently).

=== Integration

The integration environment is used to develop and test the integration of external applications
that access the application. It's also for testing the actual images that are release candidates
for production.

=== Production

The production environment should be self-explanatory: It's used as the live, productive system used by

> real clients. Code should be deployed here only after passing rigorous tests on the other two environments.

Reviewer 2: While "rigorous tests" is okay, I'm a bit worried about the wording. Because probably a lot of readers will read, "test phase!", and that would be totally inadequate.

A modern development process should accommodate a mindset that thinks, "only code released to production brings value". Hence:

* The ultimate goal of business should be to release code change, any of them, big or small, to production as fast as possible. --> _production_
* Developers need to prepare the necessary deliverables in such a transparent quality that it is easy for business to decide about releasing "now". --> _integration_

= Continuous Delivery

In order to ensure that code released to production is of the highest possible quality, we recommend
setting up three separate deployment environments to play different roles in the Continuous Integration 
/ Continuous Delivery process.

== Target Enviroments

> A typical CI/CD framework would deploy images to the following three environments:

Reviewer 2: Below we call it "CI/CD process". Maybe it's a "workflow"?

Can we use consistent wording?

Author: I didn't mean for them to be two terms for the same thing.  The CI/CD framework is the infrastructure (eg. scripts on GitLab) that implements the CI/CD process.

Reviewer 2: Correct. Good point!

=== Development

The development environment is used for internal testing of changes to infrastructure such as
endpoints, pipelines, back-end authentication, load tests, and database configuration.

Merge requests should deploy so-called 
https://about.gitlab.com/blog/2016/11/22/introducing-review-apps[Review-Apps]
that allow developers and involved parties to verify feature implementation even before
changes are merged into the main branch.

Automated tests run by the pipeline are meant to make sure consistently that existing features
don't break and manual testing is reduced to a minimum, if necessary at all.

=== Integration

The integration environment is used to as a pre-production environment to confirm the correct
functioning of all developed features. The images deployed here should be the actual images
that are release candidates for production.

=== Production

The production environment should be self-explanatory: It's used as the live, productive system 
accessed by real clients. Images that have been built, deployed, and approved on the integration 

> environment can be deployed here.

Reviewer 2: Fantastic! :trophy:

=== Development

The development environment is used to verify that features developed locally work in a
cleanly set up environment, which may include changes to infrastructure such as
endpoints, pipelines, back-end authentication, load tests, and database configuration.

Merge requests should deploy so-called 
https://about.gitlab.com/blog/2016/11/22/introducing-review-apps[Review-Apps]
that allow developers and involved parties to verify feature implementation even before
changes are merged into the main branch.

Automated tests run by the pipeline are meant to make sure consistently that existing features
don't break and manual testing is reduced to a minimum, if necessary at all.

=== Integration

The integration environment is used as a pre-production environment to confirm the correct
functioning of all developed features. The images deployed here should be the actual images
that are release candidates for production.

=== Production

The production environment should be self-explanatory: It's used as the live, productive system 
accessed by real clients. Images that have been built, deployed, and approved on the integration 

> environment can be deployed here.

Reviewer 2: I just noticed that a technical detail is missing here: It might be worthwhile to mention the Git tagging as a measure to create an audit trail, e.g.

> In extension to that, it's advisable to create an audit trail from the source code to the production state by tagging the deployed images with either the Git commit SHA or the related Git tag.

What do you think?

Author: Seems reasonable.  I am adding it.

= Continuous Delivery

> In order to ensure that code released to production is of the highest possible quality, we recommend

Reviewer 2: Maybe add to "highest possible quality":

> \[...\], development speed and least possible impact on operations for releasing updates, \[...\]

It's especially the latter why we run (physically) separate namespaces after all?

setting up three separate deployment environments to play different roles in the Continuous Integration 
/ Continuous Delivery process.

== Target Enviroments

A typical CI/CD framework would deploy images to the following three environments:

=== Development

The development environment is used to verify that features developed locally work in a
cleanly set up environment, which may include changes to infrastructure such as
endpoints, pipelines, back-end authentication, load tests, and database configuration.

Merge requests should deploy so-called 
https://about.gitlab.com/blog/2016/11/22/introducing-review-apps[Review-Apps]
that allow developers and involved parties to verify feature implementation even before
changes are merged into the main branch.

Automated tests run by the pipeline are meant to make sure consistently that existing features
don't break and manual testing is reduced to a minimum, if necessary at all.

=== Integration

The integration environment is used as a pre-production environment to confirm the correct

> functioning of all developed features. The images deployed here should be the actual images

Reviewer 2: We may want to add in brackets an explanation of the environment's name:

> \[...\] all developed features (i.e. the efforts of _all developers_ "integrated into the main branch"). \[...\]

=== Development

> The development environment is used for internal testing of changes to infrastructure such as

Reviewer 2: Let's stick to avoiding the word "testing" when it's not done in an automated fashion, e.g.
```suggestion
The development environment is used to verify that features developed locally work in a
cleanly set up environment, which may include changes to infrastructure such as
```

endpoints, pipelines, back-end authentication, load tests, and database configuration.

Merge requests should deploy so-called 

> https://about.gitlab.com/blog/2016/11/22/introducing-review-apps[Review-Apps]

Reviewer 2: Cool! Then we can omit the `-` and write "Review Apps". :+1:

Reviewer 2: I'm inclined to have this written in lower-case, i.e. "review apps". What do you think?

Author: OK, that makes sense.

that allow developers and involved parties to verify feature implementation even before
changes are merged into the main branch.

Automated tests run by the pipeline are meant to make sure consistently that existing features
don't break and manual testing is reduced to a minimum, if necessary at all.

=== Integration

> The integration environment is used to as a pre-production environment to confirm the correct

Reviewer 2: Omit the "to" in "used to", please:
```suggestion
The integration environment is used as a pre-production environment to confirm the correct
```

functioning of all developed features. The images deployed here should be the actual images
that are release candidates for production.

=== Production

The production environment should be self-explanatory: It's used as the live, productive system 
accessed by real clients. Images that have been built, deployed, and approved on the integration 
environment can be deployed here.

> .Example Django

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Examples
```
We will add more over time.

We could also use the singular "Example" for now. But let's omit the "Django", not everybody is friends with it.

Author: That's what I did at first, but the problem is that after you "make" the document, the box automatically gets the title "Example".  So then the box gets the title "Example 1: Examples".  We can configure the title of the example box generated by AsciiDoc, but it seemed simpler to leave this box as "Example 1: Example Django".  Then we can add more later.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I should have verified it by running the document generation.

But then again, why not call it "Demos", "Reference" or "Reference implementations"?

Reviewer 2: Or, in a different approach, as this is not really a verbatim example in the document itself, maybe we should use a `TIP:` instead of a box?

Author: I kind of like having it in an example box because it highlights it as being an example of the discussion.  I changed the title to "Reference implementations".

====

> The https://gitlab.com/appuio/example-django[Example Django] project is a complete example that illustrates the recommended Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The https://gitlab.com/appuio/example-django[Example Django] project is a complete example that illustrates the recommended CI/CD process.
```
I suggest to use the short "CI/CD" here. (IMHO, "D" is "Delivery".)
